welcome everybody to my october 2020
planetarium show
and uh we've set the date to the first
of october
i'm going to give you a tour through the
night sky and the objects that you could
find there
now obviously things like the moon will
change their position during the
month to come but this is fairly
representative for
the planets and of course the
constellations throughout the month
so hopefully you can use this and go out
and enjoy
some of the sights of the night sky so
i'll set things moving
and we'll swing over towards the western
sky
it's around about four o'clock in the
afternoon at the moment
and the sun is just above the horizon
there it's going to set
downwards as we let time run forward
you'll see the sky start to change
the sun's heading down now towards the
horizon down below
those trees and uh the sky goes that
beautiful orange color
and then as we get towards about seven
o'clock that's when you'll start to see
the first stars
and in this direction in the sky we'll
find one of the brightest stars in the
northern sky
arcturus now arcturus is a little bit
larger and more massive than our sun
but it's much older it's about 7 billion
years old
and so it's already started to enter the
red giant phase
and swelled up and is now
got a cooler red coloured surface rather
than the yellow color of our
sun but we'll let the
time move forward till about eight
o'clock just so that
we get rid of the last of the twilights
and you'll
see that more of the stars are coming
out many more
of the fainter ones so there's arcturus
setting down towards the west now we'll
swing south
and most obviously we have the planet
jupiter almost due
south at this time eight o'clock on the
first of october
and there is the telescope's view of
the planet jupiter with its cloud belts
and its four moons strung out
uh along its equatorial line there so
we've got io europa ganymede and
callisto
the four moons that were discovered by
galileo the first time he viewed jupiter
with a telescope
but with this we can create the effect
of a more powerful telescope and zoom
right in on the planets in all its
detail here
we've got the great red spots there that
giant hurricane
even galileo saw that over 400 years ago
now
and the two main cloud belts running
across the middle
plus the lesser worlds and spots
and the darker equatorial regions there
now we'll have a look at the moons in
order so the nearest
to jupiter of the large moons is io
and this is the most volcanic world in
the solar system we can zoom right in
and you can see the yellow color of
sulfur but the black
marks those are all the craters of
active volcanoes
spewing sulphur onto the surface it's
quite an incredible
uh the active little place just a little
bit smaller than the earth's moon
also about the same size is the second
moon out europa
very different to look at looks white
rather than yellow
and that's because it's covered in ice
but the ice has these grooves and cracks
across it
which reveal that underneath there is
some sort of salty
warm ocean which is a possible habitat
for life
and organic material seems to be
swelling up through the cracks in the
ice onto the surface
so we pull back and then swing over to
the left here
and zoom in on the largest moon of
jupiter in fact the largest moon in the
solar system
this is ganymede if ganymede orbited the
sun we'd call it a planet but it orbits
jupiter so we call it a moon
but it's actually larger than the planet
mercury and covered in these weird icy
glaciers and this too might have an
under the surface ocean which could be a
potential habitat for life
so both europa and ganymede will uh
good candidates for further exploration
with space probes
this is the fourth moon callisto and
this has a very
old surface covered in craters
so it's not an active geological world
like the innermost three
and that's all because they're closer to
jupiter
and they're locked in a tidal tug of war
with each other
whereas callisto is minding its own
business further out
so we'll pull back away from jupiter you
can see the milky way running down to
the horizon there
but just to the left of jupiter we've
got another very bright object
and that's the planet saturn next out
beyond
jupiter and when we zoom in this is the
sort of view that a small telescope will
give you
of saturn with its uh body of the planet
and the rings and some of the moons
around it
titan apatus rio de oni
uh the four largest ones that we tend to
be able to see
sometimes tethys as well so that makes
five
and then quite a few smaller ones which
you need more
powerful instruments to pick up like
enceladus and mimos they're just outside
the rings
and a host of smaller moons there's well
over 70
moons of saturn being discovered now
of course the rings are the star of the
show now they're made of thousands and
millions of small
particles from grains of dust up to
lumps of ice the size of cars all
orbiting around saturn separately
now this is the largest moon of saturn
called titan a very interesting object
in its own right and again it's a
planet-sized moon
it has its own atmosphere that's even
thicker than our own
but full of organic smog and when they
dropped the huygens probe onto the
surface
they got some photographs beneath those
cloud layers
revealing all sorts of interesting
features like lakes and rivers
and snow but the snow and the
contents of the rivers is all made of
methane natural gas
rather than water so now we're looking
directly overhead
and we're looking at the constellation
of cygnus the swan
and the stick diagram shows the long
neck and the wings spread out either
side this really does look like what
it's supposed to
in the sky so there's the swan all laid
out
now the body of the milky way runs right
down along the neck
of the swan so there's lots and lots of
stars and interesting
star clusters and nebulae in this area
one of my favorites
is this one the veil nebula
and this could be a little bit difficult
to track down unless you have the right
equipment
and for that you probably need a maybe
an eight or a ten inch diameter
telescope
but crucially unless your sky conditions
are perfect
you need a special filter called an
oxygen three filter which will pick out
the
radiation from ionized oxygen away from
all of the background and reveal the
structure
of what is an expanding shock wave of
material from a star that blew up
several thousand years ago
also in cygnus is another nebula called
the crescent nebula for obvious reasons
it's crescent
shaped and in the center is a very very
bright star that's a wolf
rayet star 100 times the mass of the sun
this is the hubble space telescope view
that we've gone over to
now and these very very large stars
blow their outer layers away revealing
the inner helium cores of them
and so their spectrum shows the lines of
helium very strongly
rather than the more common hydrogen but
they won't live very long
huge stars like that tear themselves
apart and blow up a supernovae
in just a million years which is nothing
in astronomical terms
now also in cygnus we find a much larger
nebula than
north american nebula so called because
the
outline of part of it there looks like
it's got
the florida and the gulf of mexico in
the dark region
here's the hubble space telescope view
imagine the united states and canada
tipped over on its side
it very much shows that sort of shape
lots and lots of glowing gas the red
color here is the characteristic color
from hydrogen gas glowing in these huge
clouds
all along the structure of the milky way
there
and it's these regions that go on to
form new stars as we shall see
later
so we'll move away from the north
american nebula down to the other end of
cygnus
and zoom right in on the star that marks
the beak of the swan alberio and if you
zoom in far enough you realize it's
actually a pair of stars
a double star system you can see the two
components
and one of them looks blue and the other
one looks orange
and a very good color contrast you can
even see that with binoculars
but just below alberio they've got a
rather
interesting alignment of stars
it's just a chance alignment called an
asterism
but it looks like an upside down coat
hanger in the sky
doesn't it in fact all those stars are
at different distances so it's just a
matter of perspective that we see
this rather familiar looking outline
sitting there in the sky
over to the left we find the dumbbell
nebula one of my favorites
this is a star like the sun but older
that has
reached the end of its life and is now
puffing off its outer layers
and you can see the gas and dust has
emerged from the center there and is
creating a red shock wave
as it collides with the hydrogen of
interstellar space
our sun will do that in about 5 000
million years time as it's
run out of fuel now we've swung left
and into the constellation of andromeda
it's made up out of a line of four
bright stars there and a few lesser ones
off to the side
and it's supposed to represent andromeda
the maiden
in the sky there with our arms out
very prominent at this sort of autumn
time of year
and also contains the very famous
andromeda galaxy this is our nearest
neighbor galaxy we live in the milky way
galaxy
and this is the andromeda galaxy two and
a half
million light years away from us and
containing around about one trillion
stars a little bit bigger perhaps than
the
milky way that we live in but very
similar in structure with
tightly packed stars in the nucleus
there we've switched to the hubble space
telescope view
and the dark dust lanes where new stars
are being born
this fuzzy object off to the side this
is one of its
daughter galaxies a dwarf galaxy that in
its own right that's
orbiting around the andromeda galaxy
this is very common we have
several small galaxies like this that
orbit the milky way
here's another of andromeda's companions
m 110
and this again another dwarf galaxy
the the ones that orbit the milky way we
usually refer to as the large and small
magellanic
clouds because they were discovered by
magellan and are visible in the southern
hemisphere
so there will pull back away from the
andromeda galaxy
but it's not the only galaxy to be seen
in this part of the sky
also quite nearby just three million
light years away from us
is the triangulum galaxy that's the
third
largest member of our local group after
the milky way and andromeda
but about a tenth the number of stars so
it's quite a big drop in size
very nice view of the spiral arms there
whirling away from that central bright
tightly packed nucleus
so we'll pull back from triangulum
and just pick out one or two other
objects in this part of the sky while
we're here
further away at 27 million light years
so
10 times further than the andromeda
galaxy
it's the outer limits galaxy another
spiral but this time we're viewing it
almost perfectly edge on so you see the
central bulge and then the dark dust
lanes
seeming to divide the spiral arms down
the middle there
making it look like two fried eggs back
to back
so we've finished with andromeda now
and what we'll do is let the time run
forward till 10 o'clock in the evening
and that will reveal the moon rising
high in the sky there's a satellite
going across the screen there this
stellarium software that i use knows
about the satellites quite nicely
so we'll just pivot the skipless guy
around a bit to get the view i want
and then we'll go and have a look at the
moon
and the mars so here's the moon
very much a full moon and when the moon
is full you see
all those dark mare the giant impact
basins on the surface where
ancient asteroids or even mini moonlets
crashed into and merged to make the moon
that we have now
and also lots of lesser smaller craters
all over the surface it's quite a sight
at full moon
very very bright indeed
just next to it we have the
constellation of
pisces the fish and this is really just
two lines of stars
that have little circlets on the end of
them like that
i'm quite sure how they managed to make
these appear
to the imagination as fish but
there we have it the constellation of
pisces and that's just the arm of
andromeda
and the triangle triangulum so you can
see where we are
in relation to those other
constellations
but just to the left of the moon there's
a very bright orangey red looking
thing and that is mars
and this month in october mars
is that closest approach to the earth we
are actually overtaking mars
on the inside and it's only 35 million
miles away
and that gives us a really super view of
it there's the disc of the planet and
it's two moons phobos and demos
fear and terror mars being the god of
war very appropriate names for its moons
i think
you can see the dark markings on the
surface and even some straight lines
that are
once upon a time led people to think
they might be canals
dug by martians but when we zoom in we
reveal that those straight lines are not
really the narrow linear features
they're just a rows of other objects
that
the eye can pick up on you can see the
south polar cap there at the bottom
where there's some ice
and a large volcano up near the top
there
very interesting features on the surface
of mars
so we'll pull back away we see mars in
the moon there very bright
i shall definitely be looking and
photographing mars while it's in its uh
best position
but just also in the constellation of
pisces
we have another planet and that's the
planet uranus
and here it is the pale greeny coloured
easily shows up with powerful telescope
the one that i use in my observatory is
a 14
inch reflector which is a very very nice
instrument to have
and shows up all these objects extremely
well
you can also pick up the moons there
titania
oberon and the others that all orbit
around there's five of them that are
generally within the realm of being
visible to amateur astronomers
but on the disc itself of the planet you
all you really see is this uh
atmospheric haze and it's giving it this
greenish blue
color and uh really can't see any
features on that at all
so we'll pull back away from that
and obviously to the right there we have
mars and to the left the star cluster
the pleiades
but we're going from pisces
over to aquarius just to the east
actually sorry to the west in fact
getting my directions the right way
around
and this is the stick diagram
here is aquarius the water carrier
and you can see pisces the fish there on
the screen as well
just off to the left and we've
come to look here because there's yet
another planet on show
this really is a parade of planets at
the moment
all neatly lined up across the sky
and this is the most distant planet that
we've discovered in our solar system now
that
uh pluto has been demoted oh in fact
first we're going to actually zoom in on
series
the dwarf planet i was just about to
mention that pluto was demoted to dwarf
planet
and series the largest of the asteroids
promoted to dwarf planet status
so here it is just 950 kilometers across
a nice little round world that orbits
between the orbits of mars and jupiter
but of course it shares its orbits with
all the other members of the asteroid
belt
and that's why we don't class it as a
full-blown planet
in its own right and that's the same
reason
for pluto being a dwarf planet
we can zoom right in with the power of
this software and see the
craters all over the surface of this
interesting little world
slightly soft looking craters and one or
two white spots
where there seems to be ice or possibly
even water coming up
from beneath the surface so series could
be
somewhere where we find another of these
subsurface
oceans and a possible habitat for life
may even be liquid water underneath
there now
today but now we'll go and look at
neptune
the furthest of the largest planets that
we know of in our solar system
not to say that there aren't more yet to
be discovered
but this is the blue disk of neptune
and its little collection of moons there
those are all too small to see with an
amateur telescope
uh there are only two that you can
really trace and they're both
further away from the body of the planet
to be seen in this view
and the faint rings again too faint for
an amateur telescope to see and only
discovered
when the spacecraft voyager 2 visited
neptune back in 1989
shown on the screen here we have the
large moon though
triton that you really can see this was
uh discovered almost
a few days after the planet was uh found
in its own right because it is a big
moon it's one of these planet-sized
moons
and covered in interesting markings the
hemispheres of it looked
different there's the cantaloupe terrain
and then the ice covered
frosted terrain with these black marks
that you saw there
that we think are liquid nitrogen
geysers
spewing liquid into the atmosphere of
triton
and raining out onto the surface
carrying soot with them
and for a small object that far out in
the solar system
having geological activity was a real
surprise
and still a little bit of a mystery as
to quite where the source of energy for
all that activity is coming from
so that was neptune and triton and
before that
the asteroid or dwarf planet series
so now we're going to move this time
forward to
the pre-dawn sky to 5 15 a.m
and just catch one more uh planets
before we
end and perhaps my favorite
constellation
of all of the night sky we will see that
much better
in the evening skies later on in sort of
december january february it will be
riding high
but if you really are an early bird and
you get up at five o'clock in the
morning
you'll be able to see it over here and
this is the constellation of
orion
so we'll just pull back a little bit
there's the stick diagram of orion the
hunter
with his arm raised and his shield out
before him or some people
think it's uh as this artist has done
here
an animal pelt held over his
outstretched arm
the three stars in the middle there mark
orion's belt
and the feature below it marks his sword
we'll go to the top left first
and look at the red giant star
betelgeuse
very very obviously red and this has
been misbehaving
in the last 12 months they had faded
away
around christmas of 2019 and uh
we're expecting that it's going to run
out of fuel and explode as a supernova
so it got very people very excited that
it maybe it was about to do so but it
seems to have returned to
its normal self again now so we may have
to wait
uh a bit longer perhaps up to a million
years longer
it's not an exact science predicting
when these are going to explode
here's the orion nebula though my
favorite object of all in the sky
you can see it even with the naked eye
binoculars
or a small telescope but a large
telescope reveals it in all its glory
this is where new stars are being formed
out of
cloud of gas and dust and the new stars
have blown a hole in the center you can
kind of see the bubble
where they have blown away the material
and
the shell the cocoon out of which they
were born
just above and right next to the
left-hand star
of orion's belt we've got another very
interesting region of gas and dust
and we'll zoom in on that to show you
in more detail but just there's the wide
view here we go we zoom in
and this is the horse head nebula which
is
a dark finger of cold gas and dust
swirling up to give that seahorse-like
shape in front of some red glowing
hydrogen gas
and then at the top of the screen there
we've got the flame nebula
as well another star forming region
orion is absolutely packed with all
sorts of interesting
nebulas and clouds of gas and dust that
come in different shapes and sizes
here's another one this one the gas is
glowing blue
and we can see the cold dark dust lanes
swirling in front of it and they are
obscuring a very bright blue star
and the blue light that we see is
bouncing back to us
um in what's called a reflection nebula
coming
from the the hot young star that was
born out of that material
so there's a few of the objects in orion
the hunter
now we'll just swing left and here we
have
the last object on our tour
and that's the planet venus so we'll
zoom right in on that and you'll see
that it's
got a sort of half moon maybe slightly
gibbous
shape at the moment and pointing
downwards towards the east
with the lit side we're seeing only the
clouds tops
venus's atmosphere is 100 times more
dense than our own
and the temperature on the surface is
450 degrees
centigrade caused by an enormous runaway
greenhouse effect
with all of that atmosphere mostly
carbon dioxide trapping the heat
but recently got into the news because
it was discovered that
phosphine ph3 to give it its chemical
formula was discovered
in those clouds and that is possibly a
signature of some form of life
living in the clouds of venus so that's
a brand new
discovery just in the last month and i
wonder
if that will be borne out or whether
that's just going to turn out to be some
natural process
that's led to the formation of this
weird chemical phosphine
so we've pulled back to the wide view
now and we're coming to the end of the
planetarium
show i'm just going to allow the time to
run forward
and you'll start to see one or two
moving objects again those are
satellites crossing the
sky if you did look out at 8 p.m
on the 1st of october you would probably
see the international space station
going across
but here we are the sun's now coming up
and we're coming to the end
of the planetarium show for this month i
hope it
helps you go out and identify one or two
of the objects that you can see in the
sky
and maybe turn the binoculars or a
telescope if you're
lucky enough to be able to have access
to one and see if you can find things
like
the rings of saturn the moons of jupiter
maybe even the disk of the planet mars
well worth having a go
so thank you very much and we'll bring
the planetarium show to an end there
do have a look at my other videos and
subscribe to my channel by clicking on
the button that will get you
notification of when new ones appear
onto the internet and so you won't have
to go searching for them
thanks very much